Juliane Camfield: Good afternoon. My name is Juliane Camfield,
I'm the director of Deutsches Haus at NYU
and it is my great pleasure to
welcome you to today's event.
We are absolutely delighted to award our eighth
annual Volkmar and Margret Sander prize to Dr. Heinz
Ickstadt this afternoon on November 9th, which is,
of course, a very momentous day in german history.
Heinz Ickstadt is professor Emeritus of American
literature at the Kennedy institute of North
American studies at the free university
Berlin, where he taught from 1978 through 2003.
His publications include a history of the American
novel in the 20th century and essays on late
19th century American literature and culture,
the fiction and poetry of American modernism
and post-modernism, and the history
and theory of American studies. Some
of these were collected in "Faces of Fiction:
ssays on American Literature and Culture
from the Jacksonian Age to Postmodernity" and
"Aesthetic Innovation and the Democratic Principle"
essays on 20th century American poetry and
fiction. He also edited and co-edited several
books on American literature and culture, among
them a bilingual anthology of American poetry and
a bilingual edition of Ezra Pound's "Cantos". He was
president of the german association of American
studies from 1990 until 1993, and president of the
European association of American studies from 1996
until 2000. As many of you will remember,
the Volkmar and Margret Sander prize was
established by professor Margret Sander in memory
of her late husband, professor Volkmar Sander, former
head of the german department of NYU and founder
and first director of Deutsches Haus at NYU.
The prestigious annual prize, which was awarded
for the first time in 2013 to the late Fritz Stern,
to Gary Smith in 2014, to Lya Friedrich Pfeifer
in 2015, to Claus Leggewie in 2016, to Karsten Voigt
in 2017, to Henry Jarecki in 2018, and to Susan
Nieman in 2019 (and last year we had to take a
hiatus because of COVID), is endowed with a five
thousand dollar grant and honors individuals
who have made outstanding contributions to the
cultural, political, and academic relationship
between the german-speaking world and the united
states. Heinz Ickstadt, by the way, kindly decided to
donate the monetary award to a good cause or
two – thanks so much for this generous gesture.
Deutsches Haus at NYU continues to be very
grateful to Margret Sander for establishing this
annual award, thereby providing Deutsches Haus at
NYU with the much-appreciated opportunity to honor
such worthy and distinguished individuals as Heinz
Ickstadt, whose amazing work has been instrumental for
the enhancement of not only the Transatlantic
dialogue, and whose teaching and research has
been tremendously inspiring for so many people on
both sides of the Atlantic for quite a few decades.
I'm able to attest to that from my own experience
as a student of his at Freie Universität Berlin
many moons ago. And, this is perhaps TMI [too much information], without
Heinz Ickstadt seminar about Thomas Pinchen,
I wouldn't be giving this speech. I would like
to thank the friends of Volkmar and Margret
Sander with a big shout-out to Joan Reutershan and Marty Black, who have been strong champions
of the Sander prize and of Deutsches Haus at
NYU in general for a long time. I'm therefore
delighted to now introduce Marty Black from
the Friends of Volkmar and Margret Sander to you,
who has kindly agreed to provide some remarks
on behalf of the Friends. marty, here you go.
Martin Black: Thank you so much, Juliane, thank you for that
introduction, and I just want to say as warmly
as I can, welcome to all in the audience, and
in particular, to the Friends of Volkmar and Margret
Sander. For those of you not in that group, we are
approximately 75 alumni of Volkmar and Margret.
We have been coming together for the past 10 years
to celebrate uh the memory of both of them and
um we look forward to hearing some remarks from
from Margret herself today um I do want to uh
mention as Juliane already did that that joan
ruderschen who would normally take the role of
welcoming the friends was unable to attend today
she's presenting her own works and a wonderful
exhibition and I hope that she's on this video
call and that her show goes well to those of
you who remember doris guilleton a colleague of
Volkmar and Margret you probably have heard that
she passed away this past August we will be doing
a less formal meeting of the friends and that is
scheduled for November 18. we welcome any and all
of you who are on the call today to attend that
event um to share memories of of doris and her
incredible dedication to german literature and
german language acquisition um in the german
department that was led back then by Volkmar
so again November 18th will be the the day for
that 4 p.m will be the meeting time and uh if
any of you wish to be a part of that please be
in touch directly with Juliane and she will be
sharing the zoom information and so forth at that
time otherwise um I'm delighted that we have again
fantastic guests to on the part of Dr. eikstein
to receive the prize and Dr. Gross to provide
the the lauditio and thank you both for your
participation and your presence with us today back
to you Juliane thank you so much marty it is now
my great pleasure to share with you a pre-recorded
greeting by Margret Sander from her home in
baltimore Germany Sarah if you would kindly
screen share the video thank you hello everyone
technology is a challenge but it has given me the
wonderful opportunity to send you my best
wishes virtually today from world armor Germany
I'm delighted that Dr. Heinz extra professor
embarrassed of American literature at the Kennedy
institute in Berlin will accept the foreign
Margretets under price and I look forward to reading
dr Andrew Gross's laudatio Juliane canfield has
created an excellent program at deutsche south NYU
presenting the NYU New York invited American
public with contemporary german and thinkers
from cultural political realms for pasanda would
be glad to know that the work of Deutsches Haus
which she of course founded and laid for some 20
years continues in such a fine manner I understand
that many of the friends of pharmaceutical
are here today and I send you all the best
i send you all my best
thanks so much for sharing this touching
ghost boat shaft with us Margret I know she
will watch this video at a later point and of
course thank you so much for all your generous
support of Deutsches Haus at NYU and thank you
ketamondon for creating and sending us this video
and in case you were all wondering what the
painting behind Margret that's a landscape
painted by a painter named george weiler uh not
too far from nepal's in in upstate New York and
it is of course very telling that Margret
has this painting in her house in odenweit
a painting that still connects
her to her time in New York
all right a few more things please
let me also thank my wonderful
colleagues especially zavagiana and christian
Mendonça and also our project assistant Sasha
for their dedicated work to realize our manifold
programs and endeavors including the special
awards ceremony and of course everything has
been so much more difficult since covet hit
so I really appreciate all the extra energy
that we have to invest in making things possible
things also go to Dr. zuzana or who was a day
visiting scholar at Deutsches Haus at NYU a
couple of years ago and who is also a good friend
together she and I started crafting the idea of
Heinz Ickstadt as the future thunder prize awardee
during zuzana's stay in New York thank you Susanna
we are very happy that the location and honor
of Heinz extend will be held by Dr. Andrew Gross
whom I have the pleasure of introducing to you
now Andrew Gross is a professor of American
literature at the university of gotten for many
years he worked with Heinz igstart at the john
f Kennedy institute of the fire universitat
fellin Andrew Gross is executive editor of
the new American studies journal and an assistant
editor of the European journal of American studies
recent books include profound reaction liberalism
and lyricism in mid-century American literature
which received the rob prose award from the
European association of American studies
Andrew Gross writes about topics in American
poetry travel literature jewish American
literature and liberalism and the public sphere
Andrew welcome back to Deutsches Haus at NYU
the floor is yours thank you Juliane
it's a pleasure to be here tonight
um tonight on this over determined date in german
history the deutsches house at NYU is honoring
Heinz with the Volkmar and Margret Sander prize
it's an honor for me to be a part of the ceremony
and a chance for me to pay tribute to a scholar
who has shaped my thinking about American
literature and my life for many years Heinz was
chair of the literature department at the john
f Kennedy institute for north American studies at
the free university of Berlin when I came there as
a young fulbright lecturer in 2002 he made me feel
at home so much at home that I'm still in Germany
where I teach American literature today when i
think back over those 20 years or so I picture
Heinz in a couple of characteristic settings
he's in a classroom or at a conference or at
the Kennedy institute's weekly colloquium talking
but also actively listening to what others say
i also see him at the parties that he and his wife
leonora would regularly throw at their apartment
on bundessale where similar conversations
but spilling over from books to music and
dance in recent plays would include larger groups
made up of dancers friends visiting authors and
local cultural figures these parties still take
place and always last until late into the night
there were legendary parties before
my time at a house on bingastrassa
which had been damaged in the war and had a
crack running down one wall to the foundation
that house no longer stands its fall even
suggests a parable by edgar allan poe
however the ick shots built something on top of
that foundation that helped repair the damage of
a house divided they also helped build a bridge
aGross the atlantic to the united states poe
was decidedly not the inspiration behind Heinz
Heinz's discovery of American literature rather
it was a class on herman melville taught by an
American guest professor that hein stumbled upon
as an undergraduate Heinz was actually majoring in
german literature at the time but he was unhappy
in the german department partly because the
classes were over full and partly because they
were taught by professors whose authoritarian
demeanor reflected their wartime experiences
and perhaps some of the attitudes that led to
the holocaust the problem was not just in the
classroom Heinz is of that generation of students
whose fathers returned from the war broken
and bankrupt in more than one sense Heinz's
father was a baker we can thank a flower allergy
for Heinz's refusal to follow him into the
family business of course he did not want to
follow his father's footsteps for other reasons
as well the class on melville gave him a glimpse
of some alternatives the life of the mind as
opposed to physical labor democracy and pluralism
as opposed to a political and cultural tradition
tainted by Germany's recent past Heinz's essays
make it clear that he early on identified with
ishmael in his quest for meaning and companionship
the authoritarian ahab on the other hand seemed to
anticipate many of the 20th century's catastrophes
from melville's sinking ship which seemed so
pertinent to Heinz's situation perhaps because
of its American-ness Heinz turned to a concrete
metaphor that seemed improbably to stay afloat
this was hart crane's brooklyn bridge his
dissertation on crain explores how a single
lyrical voice can be divided in the same way
melville's characters were divided between
opposing viewpoints it is the job of poetic
language to bridge that divide with concrete
images of unification crane's poetic quest to
bring together contradictory American views
would become one of Heinz's recurrent themes
it would also become his personal quest
Heinz is a bridge builder he loves to talk about
literature but he does so to make connections
between people between ideas perspectives and
places when he wrote his dissertation at the
Kennedy institute it was racked by multiple
protests the united states no longer seemed so
democratic to students opposed to the vietnam
war but it was being invoked as a symbol even
by those critical of American foreign policy
students would protest in the streets chanting usa
ss while listening to American music and wearing
blue jeans when Heinz returned as a professor
10 years later the fronts had hardened but so
had his commitment to exploring commonalities
the maoists were arguing with the trotskyists the
radicals were fighting the liberals students were
forcing professors to step over their prone bodies
to enter the classrooms in these days before email
members of the faculty would communicate with each
other by slipping notes under doors because they
couldn't stand to talk face to face in short the
various sides were pursuing their own white whales
and the ship seemed to be going down Heinz
did what he is so good at he built bridges
indeed he helped save the Kennedy institute on
more than one occasion in ways that were not
always acknowledged by the ahabs of their
own various crusades this bridge building
has been a distinguishing feature of Heinz's long
March through the institutions of higher education
he was chair of the german association
of American studies during the process
of reunification with the integration of east
german Americanness as the main challenge while
chair of the European association of American
studies the challenge was integrating eastern
European American studies associations especially
those of belarus bulgaria romania and russia
his success is evident in the vibrancy of both
of these institutions and his method if that is
the right word was grounded in the insight he had
had about American culture from the very beginning
the story Heinz most often tells about American
studies in Europe provides an instructive contrast
to pose collapsing house it is a story about
building solid structures on damaged foundations
everybody has a different story
about America and what it represents
nevertheless even competing stories can provide
a common ground this was certainly the case
when former European enemies came together
to talk about something they had in common
in talking about the united states they helped
build Europe fictions don't have to be adjudicated
to become institutional reality they just have
to be discussed this May be what heart crane was
getting at with his bridge metaphor which Heinz
describes as a symbol but also as an instantiation
as an incarnation or as he puts it in one subtitle
the poet's voyage in search of the incarnate world
Heinz ii has searched for and created an
incarnate world his guide here is a concept
of a is a concept of a democratic culture that
once counted as the heart of American studies
that concept was sorely tested by the vietnam
war and the protest movements in the 1960s it
was even more tested by the end of the cold
war when the state department stopped funding
American studies abroad and scholars of American
studies both in the united states and in Europe
began to wonder whether American studies had
always been an arm of American propaganda anyway
by the 1990s the new consensus seemed to be that
American culture was not democratic or pluralistic
but ideological that it functioned to conceal
the inequalities that are still part of American
society and still part of American foreign
policy these discussions have had the benefit
of broadening the canon and the focus of the
discipline Heinz's own writing for instance on
the harlem renaissance has profited tremendously
from the inclusion of previously excluded voices
nevertheless Heinz's perspective as a scholar of
American studies outside the continental united
states and his experience as a bridge builder has
taught him a lesson about institutional rebellion
it is important for each generation to
declare its independence from its predecessors
it May be that ritual declarations of
independence are the most characteristic
feature of American culture but to challenge the
very premise of American studies for instance an
atonement for American exceptionalism
would render such protests meaningless
even if democratic culture is a myth it is a
functional myth whose institutional incarnations
in the form of jobs journals grants and yet yes
institutes provide advantage for further criticism
this is an argument Heinz has made in several
important essays on the state of the profession
his point is that American culture does
seem like a worthwhile object of study
whatever its role in masking America's
failings to live up to its own ideals
rather than pursuing this line of argument
however I want to stress how congenial the
essay is to Heinz's way of thinking the essay
as a form has been described as a way of saying
anything about everything perhaps it is
Heinz's background in german literature
perhaps it is his international or his
institutional perspective whatever the cause he
brings a massive range of experience and erudition
to bear on everything that interests him and so
many things interest him reading the two books of
essays that grateful students collected for him
not all of his essays by any means but at least
a representative sampling I am struck I am struck
by the beauty of the prose a colleague of mine
once reMargreted that she loved to grade b a and m
a level thesis with Heinz because he always writes
reports that are like many essays splendid to read
his essays also establish a line of cogent and
consistent arguments aGross a range of subjects
hines writes in that great german philological
tradition that finds parallels where others only
encounter disciplinary and yes national boundaries
invoking for instance the french symbolist
to make sense of emily dickinson's
poetics perhaps it is not too much to say
that in writing his essays Heinz has been
working on one great encyclopedic work
that work is full of pieces on howls james hart
crane of course and william carlos williams also
more experimental poets like creely and Susan howe
and frank o'hara Heinz writes about modernism and
post-modernism he writes about pension and powers
the 60s and the 90s cooper in the 19th century
he also writes about racism and ethnicity public
art and the relationship between fictional and
historical narratives he came to pound late and
a bit unwillingly perhaps more out of a sense of
obligation to a fellow scholar than because of
any particular affinity to his work the result
an almost 1500 page bilingual edition with
commentary and a postscript by Heinz zIckstadtt
is merely one of many volumes he has teamed
up with others to write these co-productions
testify to the importance of dialogue in his
concept of democratic culture I mentioned this
particular volume because I think a recent essay
on pound best describes the coherence between
Heinz's various efforts the surface of pound's
poetry he says is criss-Grossed by intersecting
rings as if the poet had thrown stones into
a body of water to make the ripple spread
Heinz perhaps perched atop his incarnation of
the brooklyn bridge has thrown many such stones
the ripples are plain to see it is
important to also acknowledge their depth
Heinz's deep argument goes back to that early
experience of melville who brings together so many
perspectives and sources in his own encyclopedic
text from melville and everything he has read
since moby dick Heinz has learned to appreciate
and hear I quote from one of his essays the mixing
of high and popular culture the d hierarchies
hierarchicalization of the text the text as artful
anti-art the use of images already processed
through the mass media and yet repossessed
by the first glance by the innocent eye that
insists on being able to see the world as if new
these he says are all aspects of a democratic art
that asserts the possibility of new beginnings he
has also learned that quote whatever else it does
the novel and other forms of writing also gathers
and preserves evidence of a neglected cultural
subtext of lingering and unfulfilled desire
it is this ascetic function of literature
as a storehouse of unfulfilled desires
and a source of new beginnings that
constitutes the social importance of literature
Heinz has garnered other honors including
from fulbright the rockefeller foundation
the American council of learned societies the
canadian government and from various universities
and American studies associations this prize i
think is the most fitting in his work as a writer
a teacher a host a communicator and an
academic chair Heinz has built the bridges
that make communication possible
between the united states and Germany
i speak for many when I say he is my mentor my
role model the imagined audience of my own writing
and my friend thank you and
congratulations hindsight
thank you Andrew for these very personal and
thoughtful and touching reflections who just
shared with us wonderful wonderful to listen
to and to learn even more about men's extent
if we were here at george's house at NYU in
person now as you as you the people who have
been here for previous sunday prize ceremonies you
would know that now would be the time when I would
say please join me in giving a very warm welcome
to Heinz ichstad whom I will now award our aid
spotlight and Margretets on the price end of quote
but instead I will provide applause just by myself
and instead of handing the framed price
certificate to lance ixtad I'm holding it
up for him and you all to see here virtually and i
hope this will come aGross on the screen Sarah can
people see that I guess great and then it will go
into the mail to Berlin and god knows how long it
will take to get there um but before I go to the
lovely NYU mail room let's all listen to Heinz
igstat's acceptance reMargrets I can't wait so here
you go dear Heinz Ickstadt please take it away well
thank you so much Andrew dear colleague and expert
in the complex matter of bicultural existence
thank you for your warm wonderful gracious
and much too flattering allowed archer
my profound thanks go to Margretet Sander
to Juliane Camfield and New York New York
university's deutsches house for this year's folk
ma and Margret thunder prize which I accept with
great joy but also with a sense of humility and
surprise for whatever I May have done to deserve
it goes way back in time I have been emeritus now
for 18 years after an academic career dedicated
to the study of America and an
attempt to live a transatlantic life
i accept this generous award also
as a representative of a generation
a generation that grew up in post-war west
Germany I was nine when that war ended
for whom the u.s or should I say a mythical
America meant something very special
an alternative to what we had inherited from
our parents I remember how much I wanted to be
part of a society a country a culture a history of
which I could be proud and not ashamed America had
become something of a cultural ideal during those
post-war years more an object of dreams and images
than an object of perception and knowledge to be
sure some argued that this idealized America was
imposed on post-war west Germany by the us and by
political and economic necessities but if so this
imposition was readily accepted by a guilty nation
as a golden opportunity to become democratic and
thus somehow morally more acceptable as someone
who grew up in the 50s and was life not only his
academic life was shaped by the fact and even more
so by the fiction or even the fictions of America
i May be forgiven if I make use of
personal memories to illustrate my argument
throughout the 50s America
was for us something like an
antidote to the narrowness of german post-war
culture with its ambivalent desire to move on
and forget yet also to stubbornly cling to the
notion of a superior german cultural tradition
superior especially to cultureless America even
if that tradition was tainted by a very recent
nazi past I had an excellent teacher of the german
classics who had previously taught at napola
an elite school of the nazis and I had a very
exacting islam what cynical french teacher
who had survived auschwitz and both of
these circumstances I found out only later
what we were thought of german history ended
with bismarck everything afterwards we had
to find out ourselves and yet when I began my
studies in in the mid 50s I opted for german
literature until the conditions of gamma nistic
at the newly founded friar universitate Berlin
and the discovery that some famous
professors had a nazi past drove me
to switch from germanistic to the new field
of American studies their seminars instead of
having 200 undergraduate level were much smaller
and the teaching was more open more democratic
based on respect for what each of us had to
say and exercise in free intellectual exchange
one seminar on the work of herman melville shaped
my life it shaped my concept of democracy as
a communication among equals as a mindset and
an everyday attitude something I could easily
combine with my dedication to this exciting new
love of mine American literature my fulbright year
in the midwest then made me realize that the us
was not as ideal a place as I had hoped America
would be I saw a lot that made me wonder the
facts of segregation for instance which I saw
but didn't allow to sink in on a trip to the
south I believe that my idea of America was
saved by john f Kennedy I had seen his debates
with nixon on American tv and a few months
later admired his courageous speech after the
disastrous invasion attempt at the bay of peace
in 1963 I followed him with
my new jewish American wife
through the streets of Berlin from the
schonenberger art house to the freyja universitat
his murder and the subsequent years
of civil rights and vietnam protests
Margreted the beginning of a long process of
disillusion that May not be finished yet
if fritz stan has written about the five germans
he has known I could speak of at least four
Americas I have taught as a mediator of American
literature and culture to several generations of
german students of course some would say that it
never was for different Americans but always the
same u.s of racial conflict and capitalist
exploitation that the only thing that had
changed was my image of it as well as the images
that the changing America projected of itself
the academic field that made America its object
of study did not follow this process of illusion
and decons but did not only follow this process of
illusion and deconstruction but was its very motor
if as the historian alice kessler harris a
former president of the American association
once said the heart of American studies is the
pursuit of what constitutes democratic culture
then that pursuit must be an ongoing process a
process pushing beyond the limits of academia
something more than just an academic program
in questioning again and again dominant notions
of what America in fact was and who belonged to
it this process worked as a powerful dialectic
moving American studies persistently
away from the organic concept
of a unified and dominantly predominantly white
culture to to the pluralization of cultural worlds
this urge to move away from any totalizing
perspective towards the richness of the
particular speed of race class or gender has
informed the development of American studies
ever since the faith in America as a cultural
whole was first put into doubt then collapsed
the push away from the general and
holistic to ever new particulars
established a new pluralism it led to the
discovery of a plurality of American literatures
and cultures to new texts new frames and
categories of analysis new border Grossings
and concomitantly to the creation of new
departments of or within American studies
all this has surely diversified the
field but also eroded its foundation
i have profited from these discoveries many
of them exciting and enriching but try to
to withstand the centrifugal pull toward
unlimited diversification mainly because
as a german Americanist I have always
tried to look at American literature
as an entity despite its perceived diversities
therefore a concept of national coherence
still informs my approach to the study
of the us and its literary culture
although I am aware that it must also be placed
into larger a transnational a cosmopolitan and
comparative concept of frame yet I insist that
literature is dialogically oriented that it is
created and read not only within a particular
group to the exclusion of others that between
but between groups even if they are politically
or socially apart or set against each other the
idea that the reading and writing of literary
texts follows ethnic race or gender divisions
May respond to the ideological even the emotional
needs of a conflicted society or follow the
dynamics of an ever greater differentiation into
separate academic fields or follow the dynamics
of an ever greater differentiation into separate
academic uh eventually into separate departments
yet it has held only limited appeal for me
since I see literature as always able even eager
to Gross these very lines of separation
by virtue of its curiosity about
and imaginative empathy with the other a
curiosity that is stronger than the desire
to belong to even to embed it in a particular
group that is why literature can radically
question and overcome limited certainties even the
certainties and restrictions of identity politics
I'm aware that this view is partly due
to the privilege of an outside position
non-American Americanists should be
committed to studying the united states
as something of an entity as an
object in front of their very eyes
and I'm weary that the german association
of American studies whose chairman I once
was some 30 years ago tends to forego that
advantage by following the American example
too closely from our position outside we see our
American other differently than our colleagues
within the united states who are determined to
escape the promises as well as the rhetoric of
the disciplines nationalist foundation in the
30s when he tried to academically establish a
homegrown American culture against the continuing
continuing dominance of especially english culture
I'm also aware that this totalizing view from
outside might be a generational one I remember an
english colleague accusing the first generation
of European Americanists to which I belong as
having been brainwashed by agents of American
cultural policy and indeed I got an idea of what
he meant when after the opening of the Berlin
wall a representative of usia told me that now
after the cold war had been won it was time
for American studies to ride into the sunset
although I found this offensive it did
not make me regret what I had done as
a professor of American literature as a
subject although its contexts have changed
to which I remained committed even
during my long years of retirement
does that imply that I am still loyal
to my original concept of America
yes and no the us surely cannot be taken as
mortal and ideal any longer but we can still
learn from it positively and negatively as Susan
neyman has recently shown in early learning from
the germans confronting race the memory of
evil there could even be a mutual learning
process and it would indeed be foolish not to
look at the united states when we might benefit
from its example does that make me
believe in American exceptionalism
i don't think so although there are
many aspects of its history and culture
that make it it's different and quite particular
in its contradictions self-projections and
self-deceptions ever since the mid-19th century
American artists and intellectuals have seen
America's otherness vis-a-vis overbearing European
culture as grounded in a democratic principle that
as herman melville once wrote to his publisher
every diking the declaration of independence
does make a difference this conviction with its
commitment emphasis on the common and the everyday
has been the motto of American aesthetic
innovation ever since it has given impulse
to great many to great many often antagonistic
aesthetics from william dean howells's realism
to william carls williams or link's news trust
in the poetic resource of ordinary speech or the
deconstruction of textual hierarchy in gertrude
stein's poetics the linguistic democracy of each
word having equal weight and it accounts for
the alignment of democracy and the arts in john
dewey's pragmatist aesthetics with its emphasis
on a continuous process of innovation and reform
an evolutionary drive toward what ralph waldo
emerson called this new yet unapproachable America
although the power of this aesthetic ideology
rooted in the democratic principle May now be
exhausted it has worked as a creative incentive
far into the 20th century it has certainly
empowered American modernism informed its
theories and formed its practices it makes it ver
its various manifestations peculiarly
American without making them exceptional
in other words my faith in democracy still derives
from that seminar of 60 years ago more than from
the political reality of America itself since
then my American wife has taught me to believe
in the down-to-earth approach the do-it-yourself
tradition that have been so dominant in American
life and surely our values worth sharing
if we despair of contemporary politics
of the persistent power of the many kinds of
Trumpism in the us as well as in Europe we should
also think of the counterforce of democratic
networking that took georgia away from Trump
democracy for me is thus rather a metaphor for
personal attitude towards others a state of mind
a way of life I associated specifically with
john dewey's down-to-earth utopian belief in
creative democracy which he formulated also in
a period of social crisis as his credo and his
testament democracy he said is a reality only as
it is indeed a common place of living it is the
sole way of living which believes wholeheartedly
in the process of experience as end and as means
need and desire go beyond what exists they
continually open the way into the unexplored
and unattained future thank you once
again thank you so much friendship
and quits out sound thanks for joining in the
chorus here uh Andrew and marty thank you for your
powerful and insightful speech that transported
me back to the john f Kennedy institute
in the uh late 80s or early 90s or 1928 whenever
it was uh reminded me of how why i've always been
so inspired by you and how you've put me
on a path that has led to this rule so um
thank you thank you again Juliane it's been such
a pleasure to be able to give you this award and
uh madrid and I are so you accepted it and I want
to thank you all Andrew marty Sarah Margret jones
Susanna it takes a village to put together these
things and this was so meaningful I hope not just
for me but for everyone else so thank you friends
extra for all you've done as a bridge builder
that is a wonderful description uh in midler
from midler between cultures and worlds and times
and look forward to to you know for this
dialogue to be continued by by your many
students and people you have inspired on both
sides of the atlantic and probably also elsewhere
to make it into a bigger picture um it's always
strange to end things so abruptly because usually
we would have a reception and then we would take
out the guests for dinner so it's sad but we can't
do that but we will be back in person at some
point and we will be taking out our distinguished
speakers for dinners and luncheons again to
exchange views in a more informal setting in
the meantime let me just mention that our annual
festival neue literature is starting on thursday
uh the topic will be turn and face the strange
which seems timely every day these days so if
you have time join us for these events that happen
virtually and will bring together german language
authors from austria switzerland Germany and
liechtenstein in dialogue with us intellectuals
and writers so please join us and in case uh
last but not least you've been wondering about
the images behind me these are photos by a new
york based german photographer named stefan falca
who took to the streets during covet and
documented what was happening and very changed new
york we are showing these right now and hopefully
we will be able to celebrate stefan's work with
the public event whenever which is health at
NYU will be open to the general public hopefully
in the spring semester to bring this wonderful
exhibition to a close and yeah I'm running out
of things to say but I don't want to say goodbye
so this is a long goodbye thank you everybody
dan bishon have a wonderful day and evening please
stay in touch and join us again soon bye thank you
thank you thank you Andrew thank you